---
layout: post
title: The Quayside Project
date: 2020-02-23
---

### The Quayside Project 

Living in a sustainable neighbourhood sounds pretty ideal for the average climate activist, but with the rise in concerns over climate change, the efforts by large cities to create a carbon-neutral environment are not enough. Toronto has managed to [reduce their carbon emissions by 44 percent since 1990](https://www.toronto.ca/services-payments/water-environment/environmentally-friendly-city-initiatives/transformto/torontos-greenhouse-gas-inventory/), but still produces over [15 million tonnes of CO2 each year](https://taf.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/TAF_GHGSummary_2016_GHG_Inventory_2019_Final-1.pdf). Fortunately, many “smart city” initiatives have commenced around the globe, focusing on developing buildings both sustainably and beautifully. Close to home is the [Sidewalk District](https://www.sidewalktoronto.ca/), which is being developed by Sidewalk Labs on Toronto’s waterfront. This district, and specifically the live-work neighbourhood [Quayside](https://www.sidewalktoronto.ca/plans/quayside), will be designed to be completely carbon-neutral through advanced power grids, innovative recycling techniques, and monitoring the energy usage in offices and apartments. Toronto’s Quayside Project has the potential to pave the way for others globally and if successful, will be the first project of its kind in North America. 

### What is a Smart City? 

A smart city can be defined as a city that addresses public issues through technological solutions[^1]. In more detailed definitions, a smart city encompasses many different “smart” factors, such as the economy, sustainability, technology, and health[^2]. The Quayside District Project encompasses all of these criteria by integrating technology into sustainable practices in both apartments and office buildings. The Master Innovation and Development Plan produced by Sidewalk Labs has a comprehensive outline of goals for the district that correlate with the goal behind smart city development, “the provision of qualitative and innovative services to citizens, economic activities, and institutions."[^3] By integrating the live-work-play aspects of life, Quayside ensures it is both a “smart” and enjoyable neighbourhood. 

### A Carbon-Neutral Community 

To be a carbon neutral community is [to balance the carbon emissions produced with an equal amount of carbon savings elsewhere](https://www.carbonfootprint.com/carbonneutrality.html). The Quayside District prides itself in using carbon-neutral energy sources to power the homes and offices, stating that this change in carbon emissions [“represents a reduction of more than 85 percent from Toronto’s citywide average, the equivalent of removing over 100,000 cars off the road each year.”](https://storage.googleapis.com/sidewalk-toronto-ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/23143305/MIDP_Vol.2_Chap.4_Sustainability.pdf) Their official plan highlights the use of [solar panels for on-site power, using 40% of roof space leading to easy access of electricity during peak hours of the day](https://storage.googleapis.com/sidewalk-toronto-ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/23143305/MIDP_Vol.2_Chap.4_Sustainability.pdf). The power grid connecting the Sidewalk District to Toronto’s main power grid would [store power in batteries for use overnight](https://storage.googleapis.com/sidewalk-toronto-ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/23143305/MIDP_Vol.2_Chap.4_Sustainability.pdf). With these two technologies working complementary to each other, Quayside can avoid peak pricing and energy usage during the day, while still supporting the tenants electrical needs overnight.

### Gamification 

Although Quayside is a major technological project, it is a city many will call home. Keeping in mind the importance of the residents, Sidewalk Labs has a focus area on sustainable activities that tenants can improve on, for example, their recycling habits. The company has chosen to use gamification techniques to encourage residents to recycle, and to recycle properly. Gamification uses two types of motivations that make people choose to do something[^4], while enjoying it. The first is intrinsic motivation, “where a behaviour or action is carried out because it is aligned with an internal value.”[^5] The Quayside Project takes advantage of this by using [signage above recycling chutes that show common recycling mistakes and indicates the percentage of waste diverted from the landfill every week](https://storage.googleapis.com/sidewalk-toronto-ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/23143305/MIDP_Vol.2_Chap.4_Sustainability.pdf). This inspires people to “beat their score” and increase the percentage, while also making an impact on the community. The second type of motivation is extrinsic, “where external awards such as money or status are offered in exchange for a continued commitment”.[^6] Sidewalk Labs has discussed using the opposite of a reward, and implementing a [pay-as-you- throw program](https://storage.googleapis.com/sidewalk-toronto-ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/23143305/MIDP_Vol.2_Chap.4_Sustainability.pdf) within their apartments encouraging residents to think about the true cost of their waste. An advantage to using these techniques is that it provides concrete information on how to improve recycling behaviour[^7] through more enjoyable processes. The signs and displays that Sidewalk Labs plan to implement will allow residents to understand the impact they are having when they recycle, and how they can lessen that impact throughout their daily lives.

### Living and Working 

The Quayside District is described as a live-work community, where apartments and offices exist within the same space. Both of these types of buildings have different needs when it comes to energy consumption and appliances, yet they are also very similar. Sidewalk Labs has sparked the idea of a [“scheduler,” which automates the basic electrical needs of the tenants]https://storage.googleapis.com/sidewalk-toronto-ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/23143305/MIDP_Vol.2_Chap.4_Sustainability.pdf) while being personalized to the type of building it is. Within an apartment, the scheduler would [delay the running of the dishwasher](https://storage.googleapis.com/sidewalk-toronto-ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/23143305/MIDP_Vol.2_Chap.4_Sustainability.pdf) to ensure that it is not being used during peak hours, or it will [turn off lights and turn down the heat when the tenants are not home](https://storage.googleapis.com/sidewalk-toronto-ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/23143305/MIDP_Vol.2_Chap.4_Sustainability.pdf). In an office setting the needs are slightly different. The technology will [adjust temperature based on occupancy, the weather, requests from the workers, and out of office notifications](https://storage.googleapis.com/sidewalk-toronto-ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/23143305/MIDP_Vol.2_Chap.4_Sustainability.pdf). The scheduler would be available as an app on all smartphones, and could respond to requests and overrides from the tenants, ensuring that it is controlled and personalized. By using this technology, Sidewalk Labs is ensuring energy is only used when needed. Although these differences may seem small, they have the potential to make large savings in energy costs.

### The Risks of Quayside 

Many people are concerned with their privacy and autonomy, especially when looking at how integrated Sidewalk Labs’ technology is. Sidewalk Labs have stated that the schedulers will have [“full visibility into the household’s energy resources as well as real-time utility rates,”](https://storage.googleapis.com/sidewalk-toronto-ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/23143305/MIDP_Vol.2_Chap.4_Sustainability.pdf) which raises concerns about what they will do when in possession of this information. Some believe that the technology is too invasive, as they are aware of which tenants are home, when they are leaving, and what energy the household uses. Despite these concerns, the benefits of this technology are phenomenal with the potential to have large-scale reductions of carbon emissions and household electrical waster. [The real time look into what energy systems are in use](https://storage.googleapis.com/sidewalk-toronto-ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/23143305/MIDP_Vol.2_Chap.4_Sustainability.pdf) allows Sidewalk Labs to fully understand what can be done to create a more sustainable neighbourhood.

### A Smart World 

When the Quayside project is [successfully implemented in 2040](https://www.sidewalktoronto.ca/), it will pave the way for other sustainable cities in North America. This project serves as a major stepping-stone for Canadian sustainable goals, and hopefully inspires other cities to use this technology within their own communities. Sidewalk Labs aspires to [“empower individuals to act more sustainably in their daily lives,”](https://storage.googleapis.com/sidewalk-toronto-ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/23143305/MIDP_Vol.2_Chap.4_Sustainability.pdf) whether that be through living in Quayside or not.

## Citations

Aguiar-Castillo, L., Clavijo-Rodriguez, A., De Saa-Perez, P., & Perez-Jimenez, R. (2019). Gamification as An Approach to Promote Tourist Recycling Behaviour.

Stratigea, A., Papadopoulou, C.-A., & Panagiotopoulou, M. (2015). Tools and Technologies for Planning the Development of Smart Cities. Journal of Urban Technology, 44–62.

Trindade, E. P., Hinnig, M. P. F., Moreira da Costa, E., Marques, J. S., Bastos, R. C., & Yigitcanlar, T. (2017). Sustainable Development of Smart Cities: A Systematic Review of the Literature. Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity.

[^1]: (Stratigea, 49)
[^2]: (Trindade, 2)
[^3]: (Stratigea, 50)
[^4]: (Aguiar-Castillo, 5)
[^5]: (Aguiar-Castillo, 5)
[^6]: (Aguiar-Castillo, 5)
[^7]: (Aguiar-Castillo, 6)
